# Introduction

As we try to navigate global biodiversity change, filling in knowledge
gaps about biodiversity becomes instrumental to monitoring and
mitigating those changes (@Gonzalez2022Monitor, @Abrego2021Accounting).
However, cataloging species, populations and, in particular, ecological
interactions (e.g., predation, parasitism, and pollination) is a
substantial challenge (@Polis1991Complex, @Pascual2006Ecologicala).
There are methodological and biological constraints that hinder our
ability to observe all ecological interactions, leading to significant
uncertainties in our understanding of these interactions. For example,
the spatial and temporal uncoupling of species (@Jordano1987PatMut) and
the large number of rare and cryptic interactions in a community
contribute to these uncertainties (@Jordano2016Samplingb). More
generally, a handful of conditions must be satisfied for an interaction
to be observed locally. First, both species must have overlapping
geographic ranges, i.e. they must co-occur within the region of interest
(@Blanchet2020Cooccurrencea). Second, they must have some probability of
meeting. Probabilities of interspecific encounters are typically low,
especially for rare species with low relative abundances
(@Canard2012Emergencea). The probability that species meet each other
also depends on their biological characteristics, such as the
synchronization of their phenology (@Olesen2010Missing,
@Singer2012GeoMos) and their discoverability (e.g., @Broom2005You).
Finally, when species do come into contact, an interaction occurs only
if their traits are locally compatible\
(@Poisot2015Speciesa), including but not limited to their body
phenotypes (@Bolnick2011WhyInt, @Stouffer2011RolBod, @Gravel2013InfFooa)
and behavioral choices (@Pulliam1974Theory, @Choh2012PreRol).
Interactions may also be influenced by the presence or prevalence of a
third species (e.g., of a more profitable prey species)
(@Golubski2011ModMod, @Sanders2012Indirect). Documenting the location
and timing of interactions becomes even more difficult when accounting
for the spatiotemporal variability of ecological interactions
(@Poisot2012Dissimilaritya, @Poisot2015Speciesa). Environmental factors,
such as temperature (@Angilletta2004TemGro), drought
(@Woodward2012CliCha), climate change (@Gilman2010FraCom,
@Woodward2010ChaEco, @Araujo2011Usinga), and habitat modifications
(@Tylianakis2007HabMod), contribute to this spatiotemporal variability
of interactions by impacting species abundance and traits. Even after
satisfying all these conditions, there remains a possibility that the
interaction does not occur locally, either due to the intricate nature
of the system or simply by chance. If it does occur, it might still go
unnoticed, particularly if it happens infrequently. In this context, it
is unsurprising that our knowledge of ecological interactions remains
limited (@Hortal2015SevSho) despite extensive biodiversity data
collection (@Schmeller2015GloTer).

Knowing the biological capacity of two species to interact directly (via
e.g., trophic interactions) is necessary but not sufficient for
inferring their interaction at a specific time and space. The
recognition of the intrinsic variability of species interactions has led
ecologists to expand their representation of ecological networks (also
known as ecological webs) to include a probabilistic view of
interactions (@Poisot2016Structure, @Dallas2017Predictinga,
@Fu2021Link). This different perspective allows us to fill in the
Eltonian shortfall (@Hortal2015SevSho) by modeling the probability of
detecting interactions, which can be an important tool for directing
efforts and taking action, especially in places where access and
resources for research are scarce. Representing interactions
probabilistically enables us to capture the spatiotemporal variability
of the aforementioned ecological processes and the uncertainties
associated with their measurement. As opposed to binary deterministic
webs, in which interactions are regarded as either occurring or not,
probabilistic webs, within a Bayesian framework, express our degree of
belief (or confidence) regarding the occurrence of interactions. Based
on the scale at which they are estimated, probabilistic interactions may
reflect our level of confidence in whether interactions will be
observed, realized, or biologically feasible. As an illustration, we
could outline a situation in which there is a 50% certainty that an
interaction occurs 50% of the time, or that there is a 50% certainty
that it simply occurs. Our level of confidence should be more definitive
(approaching either 0 or 1) as we extend our sampling to a broader area
and over a longer time period, thereby diminishing the uncertainty of
the interactions (but not necessarily the estimation of their
variability). In the broadest sense, binary networks are also a type of
probabilistic network, in which the numerical value of an interaction is
restrained to 0 (non-occurring) or 1 (occurring). Yet, for the sake of
clarity, we omit binary networks from our discussion of probabilistic
networks in this contribution. In probabilistic webs, only forbidden
interactions (i.e., interactions prohibited by biological traits or
species absence, @Jordano2003Invarianta, @Olesen2010Missing) have a
probability value of zero by default, provided that intraspecific trait
variability is considered (@Gonzalez-Varo2016Labilea).

By accounting for the uncertainty of interactions, probabilistic webs
may provide a more realistic portrait of species interactions and
network structure (i.e. community-level properties), which are major
drivers of the functioning, dynamics, and resilience of ecosystems
worldwide (@Proulx2005Networka, @McCann2007ProBio, @McCann2011FooWeb,
@Rooney2012IntFoo). Moreover, the application and development of
computational methods in network ecology, often based on a probabilistic
representation of interactions, can alleviate (and guide) the sampling
efforts required to document species interactions
(@Strydom2021Roadmapa). For example, statistical models can be used to
estimate the uncertainty of pairwise interactions (@Cirtwill2019QuaFra)
and the probability of missing (false negatives) and spurious (false
positives) interactions (@Guimera2009MisSpu). Considering the high rate
of false negatives in species interaction data due to the difficulty of
witnessing rare interactions (@Catchen2023Missinga), these models could
inform the identification of priority sampling locations of ecological
webs where data collection would yield the most valuable information,
thereby reducing errors. Optimization models for sampling locations have
mostly found applications in biological systems that are not networks,
such as identifying priority sampling sites for disease hotspots
(@Andrade-Pacheco2020Finding), but there is substantial promise in
applying them to probabilistic ecological interactions. Statistical
models can also be used to generate predictions of ecological webs
without prior knowledge of pairwise interactions, for instance using
body size (@Petchey2008SizFor, @Gravel2013InfFooa), phylogeny
(@Elmasri2020HieBay, @Strydom2022Food), or a combination of niche and
neutral processes (@Bartomeus2016ComFra, @Pomeranz2019InfPre) for
inference. Topological null models, which generate probabilistic
networks by preserving chosen characteristics of the binary adjacency
matrix while intentionally omitting others (@Bascompte2003NesAss,
@Fortuna2006HabLos), serve as other examples of common probabilistic
network models. Null models can be used to produce underlying
distributions of network measures for null hypothesis significance
testing. Many measures have been developed to describe the structure
(@Poisot2016Structure) and diversity (@Ohlmann2019Diversity,
@Godsoe2022Species) of probabilistic webs. These models and measures
support the use of this approach for the study of a wide range of
ecological questions, from making better predictions of species
distribution (@Cazelles2016Theorya) to forecasting the impact of climate
change on ecological webs (@Gilman2010FraCom).

The lack of clear guidelines on the use of probabilistic interaction
data is worrisome, both for data producers and re-users who generate and
manipulate these numbers. This is concerning because sampling strategies
and decisions regarding network construction can affect our
understanding of network properties (@Brimacombe2023ShoReu). Besides
methodological difficulties that may arise when assessing probabilistic
interactions, a precise definition of probabilistic interactions appears
to be lacking, making the estimation and use of these data more
difficult. We aim to take a step back by outlining different ways in
which probabilistic interactions are defined and used in network
ecology. We distinguish two broad categories of probabilistic webs that
necessitate distinct approaches when applied to key ecological
questions: local webs describing probabilities of realized interactions,
and regional webs (metawebs) describing probabilities of potential
interactions. We highlight the distinctions in the ecological meaning of
these two representations and show that they yield different statistical
outcomes regarding e.g. the spatial and temporal scaling of interactions
and the prediction of binary webs across space. Moreover, there is
currently no metadata standard that could guide the documentation of all
types of probabilistic interactions (although see e.g., @Salim2022Data
who discuss data standards for deterministic mutualistic webs).
Well-defined metadata for probabilistic webs would support more adequate
manipulation and integration of interaction data from different sources
and guard against possible misinterpretations arising from ambiguous
definitions of probabilistic networks. These metadata should outline the
nature (i.e., local or regional) and type (e.g., predatory or
pollination) of the interactions, provide information regarding the
taxonomic level, identities, and characteristics (e.g., life stages) of
the individuals involved in an interaction, present the mathematical
formulation of probabilities, including clearly identified conditional
variables (e.g., spatial and temporal scales), and describe the methods
and contexts (e.g., location, time, environmental conditions) in which
interactions were estimated. Inadequately documented probabilistic
interaction data should be used with caution when analyzing ecological
webs. Our observations and advice can be applied to many types of
ecological networks, from food webs to host-virus networks. Indeed,
excluding networks of indirect interactions such as competition and
facilitation networks (@Kefi2015NetStr, @Kefi2016HowStr), most
ecological webs describe probabilities of direct interactions, which are
conceptually and mathematically analogous regardless of their biological
type (e.g., trophic and parasitic interactions).

# Probabilistic representations of interactions

One of the first aspects to take into consideration when estimating or
interpreting probabilities of interactions is knowing if they describe
potential or realized interactions. A potential (regional) interaction
is defined as the biological capacity of two taxa to interact (i.e., the
probability that they *can* theoretically interact) whereas a realized
(local) interaction is the materialization or observation of this
interaction in a well-defined space and time (i.e., the probability that
they interact locally). Here, we use the terms *metaweb*
(@Dunne2006Network) to designate regional webs of potential interactions
and *local webs* (@Poisot2012Dissimilaritya) for those of realized
interactions. Metawebs are the network analogs of the species pool,
where local webs originate from a subset of both species (nodes) and
interactions (edges) of the regional metaweb (@Saravia2022Ecological).
Without clear documentation, it can be challenging to know if published
probabilistic webs describe local or regional interactions (tbl. 1
provides examples of studies employing both types of probabilistic
networks), or if so-called probabilities are in reality *interaction
scores* (i.e., non-probabilistic quantitative interactions). When
probabilistic regional interactions are used and interpreted as local
interactions (and conversely), this may generate misleading findings
during data analysis. We believe that a better understanding of the
differences, similarities, and relationships between these two
probabilistic representations of ecological webs would alleviate
interpretation errors and facilitate a more adequate utilization of
interaction data.

## Pairwise interactions: the building blocks of ecological networks

Local and metawebs, like any type of network, are made of nodes and
edges that can be represented at different levels of organization and
precision. The basic unit of food webs and other ecological networks are
individuals that interact with each other (e.g., by predation,
@Elton2001Animal), forming individual-based networks
(@Melian2011EcoDyn). The aggregation of these individuals into more or
less homogeneous groups (e.g., populations, species, families) allows us
to represent nodes at broader taxonomic scales, which affects our
interpretation of the properties of these systems
(@Guimaraes2020Structurea, @Hemprich-Bennett2021AssImp).

Edges linking nodes can describe a variety of interaction measures.
Ecologists have traditionally represented interactions as binary objects
that were considered realized after observing at least one individual
from group $i$ interact with at least another individual from group $j$.
In a binary adjacency matrix $B$, the presence or absence of an
interaction $B_{i \rightarrow j}$ between two taxa can be viewed as the
result of a Bernoulli process
$B_{i \rightarrow j} \sim {\rm Bernoulli}(P(B_{i \rightarrow j}))$, with
$P(B_{i \rightarrow j})$ being the probability of interaction that
characterizes our limited knowledge of the system and its intrinsic
spatiotemporal variability. In probabilistic networks,
$P(B_{i \rightarrow j})$ are edge values, and the only two possible
outcomes are the presence ($B_{i \rightarrow j} = 1$) or absence
($B_{i \rightarrow j} = 0$) of an interaction between each pair of
nodes. Depending on the type of probabilistic network (local or
metaweb), the mathematical formulation and interpretation of stochastic
parameters like $P(B_{i \rightarrow j})$ can be linked to environmental
and biological factors such as species relative abundance, traits, area,
and time (tbl. 1), for example using logistic regression with a logit
link function with continuous explanatory variables. Predicting the
number of local webs in which the interaction occurs can be achieved by
using a Binomial distribution, assuming a constant probability of
interaction and independence between networks (trials). When considering
uncertainties around the estimation of $P(B_{i \rightarrow j})$, a Beta
distribution can also be used to encompass all possible probability
values. In that case, a Beta-Binomial distribution can be used to
predict the number of networks in which the interaction occurs.
Observing an interaction between two taxa at a given location and time
provides important information that can be used to update previous
estimates of $P(B_{i \rightarrow j})$, informing us on the biological
capacity of both taxa to interact and the environmental conditions that
enabled them to interact locally.

Even though binary webs constitute a highly valuable source of
ecological information (@Pascual2006Ecologicala), they overlook
important factors regarding interaction strengths. Represented in a
quantitative adjacency matrix $W$ as numbers not confined to the
$[0, 1]$ range, interaction strengths better describe the energy flows,
demographic impacts or frequencies of interactions between nodes
(@Berlow2004Interaction, @Borrett2019Walk), with $W_{i \rightarrow j}$
being a natural $\mathbb{N}$ or real $\mathbb{R}$ number depending on
the measure. For example, they may represent local interaction rates
between pairs of taxa (e.g., the flower-visiting rates of pollinators in
a mutualistic network, @Herrera1989PolAbu). When interaction strengths
characterize predation pressure on prey taxa in food webs, they can
serve as good estimators of the parameters describing species
interactions in a Lotka-Volterra model (e.g., @Emmerson2004Predatora).
The extra amount of ecological information in quantitative networks
typically comes at a cost of greater sampling effort and data volume in
predictive models (@Strydom2021Roadmapa), which can lead to relatively
high levels of uncertainties when inferring quantitative webs with
limited data.

Just like binary networks, the uncertainty and spatiotemporal
variability of interaction strengths can be represented
probabilistically. However, the need to estimate the probability
distribution of all possible values of interaction strengths can make
the inference of probabilities more challenging in quantitative webs
compared to binary webs, which require only one probability estimate for
each interaction. Interaction strengths can follow various probability
distributions depending on the measure used. For instance, they can
follow a Poisson distribution
$W_{i \rightarrow j} \sim {\rm Poisson}(\lambda_{i \rightarrow j})$ when
predicting frequencies of interactions between pairs of nodes, with
$\lambda_{i \rightarrow j}$ being the expected rate at which individuals
of taxa $i$ and $j$ interact (e.g., the average number of prey $j$
consumed by all predators $i$ in a given time period). The Poisson
distribution can also be 0-inflated after initially modeling
non-interacting taxa (e.g., @Boulangeat2012AccDis employ a 0-inflated
model to analyze species abundance following the modeling of species
presence and absence), which constitute the majority of taxa pairs in
most local webs due to their typically high sparseness
(@Jordano2016Samplingb). Because of the methodological difficulties
typically encountered when building deterministic quantitative webs
(which are only partially mitigated by models such as Ecopath,
@Plaganyi2004Criticala), binary webs, which are easier to sample
(@Jordano2016Samplingb) and predict (@Strydom2021Roadmapa), have been
more frequently studied and modeled. Moreover, most published
probabilistic networks and methods describe probabilistic interactions
whose outcome is binary (whether interaction probabilities are regarded
as constant or variable, e.g. represented by a Beta distribution), which
underlines the need for better guidelines regarding the interpretation
and manipulation of these types of webs first. For these reasons, our
primary focus in this contribution will be on addressing the challenges
in interpreting and using interaction probabilities in Bernoulli
distributions, in both probabilistic local and metawebs.

## Local webs: communities interacting in space and time

Probabilistic local webs describe how likely taxa are to interact at a
given location and time period (i.e., interactions are contingent upon
the environmental and biological conditions of the community). In local
webs, edges commonly represent our degree of belief that two taxa
interact in nature, but can also represent the probability of
*observing* this interaction (@Catchen2023Missinga). For example,
@Gravel2019BriElt used a dataset of binary local European food webs of
willow-galling sawflies and their natural enemies, all referenced in
space and time and consisting of similar species, to infer the
probabilities of locally observing interactions between co-occurring
species. This was achieved by situating local webs within the context of
environmental variables, i.e. by including temperature and precipitation
as conditional variables in some of their models.

We define space as the collection of geographic coordinates $(x, y, z)$,
with $(x, y)$ representing longitude and latitude coordinates, and $z$
denoting either altitudes or depths. These point coordinates delineate
the spatial boundaries of the system, which may be portrayed as a
polyhedron. Ecological interactions may exhibit variations along
altitudinal gradients, as evidenced by changes in hummingbird-plant
interactions (@Weinstein2017PerBil and @Weinstein2017ComTra) and
mosquito biting rates (e.g., @Kulkarni2006EntEva) at different
elevations. In contrast, time is defined as the specific time period
within which interactions were either observed or predicted. With these
definitions in mind, space and time can be conceptualized as distinct
patches or time segments. Treating them as discrete dimensions aligns
with the common sampling methods of ecological webs and provides actual
probabilities of interactions across space and time. This differs from
the approach of treating them as continuous variables, where edge values
represent probability densities (i.e., relative likelihoods of
interactions occurring at infinitesimal locations and instants in time)
rather than discrete probability values (which can be obtained by
integrating probability densities). By employing discrete locations and
time periods, we can quantify an area (or volume) $A$ and a duration
$t$, which can be readily used in spatiotemporal analyses of ecological
networks. For example, when studying network-area relationships (NAR,
@Galiana2018Spatiala), we anticipate that local probabilities of
interactions scale positively with area and duration because taxa have
more opportunities to interact as these dimensions expand.

The probability that two taxa $i$ and $j$ interact in a local web
$L_{x,y,z,t}$ (spatial and temporal subscripts hereafter omitted for
clarity) can be conditional on many environmental and biological
factors. One of these is their co-occurrence $C_{i,j}$, which is usually
a Boolean describing if the geographic distributions of both taxa
overlap within the study area. Co-occurrence can be modeled
probabilistically, in which case it may conform to a Bernoulli
distribution $C_{i,j} \sim {\rm Bernoulli}(P(C_{i,j}))$, where the
probability of co-occurrence $P(C_{i,j})$ can be estimated through the
application of joint species distribution models (e.g.,
@Pollock2014UndCoo). Considering that the probability that two
non-co-occurring taxa interact locally is zero (i.e.,
$P(L_{i \rightarrow j}| C_{i,j} = 0) = 0$), the probability of local
interaction can be obtained by multiplying the probability of
interaction given co-occurrence with the probability of co-occurrence:

[$$P(L_{i \rightarrow j}) = P(L_{i \rightarrow j}| C_{i,j} = 1) \times
P(C_{i,j} = 1).\qquad{(1)}$$]{#eq:co-occur}

Other important factors that can impact interaction probabilities at the
local scale are taxa relative abundance (@Canard2012Emergencea) and
traits (@Poisot2015Speciesa), as well as environmental factors such as
temperature (@Angilletta2004TemGro), precipitation
(@Woodward2012CliCha), habitat structure (@Klecka2014EffHab), and
presence of other interacting taxa in the network (@Pilosof2017MulNat,
@Kefi2012MorMea), as described above. Here, we use the variable
$\Omega_{x,y,z,t}$ (hereafter simply $\Omega$) to describe the
biological and ecological context in which interaction probabilities
were estimated. For example, if a research team conducts a mesocosm
experiment to estimate interaction probabilities between predators and
prey with and without shelters (a place that offers refuge and
protection for prey, shielding them from predators), $\Omega$ would
represent the presence or absence of these shelters. Like co-occurrence,
$\Omega$ can also be modeled probabilistically when the stochasticity or
uncertainty of environmental and biological factors is considered. In
sum, $\Omega$ represents all ecological and biological variables that
were taken into consideration when measuring interaction probabilities
and is, therefore, a subset of all factors actually impacting ecological
interactions.

The probability that two taxa $i$ and $j$ interact in a local web $L$
can thus be conditional on the area (or volume) $A$, the time interval
$t$, their co-occurrence $C_{i,j}$ and chosen environmental and
biological conditions $\Omega$. Although these variables are associated
with distinct questions or mechanisms related to ecological
interactions, they may covary with each other, such as the possible
dependence of $C_{i,j}$ and $\Omega$ on spatial and temporal scales.
When estimating interaction probabilities using e.g. a generalized
linear model with multiple explanatory variables that might not be
independent, it may become important to address collinearity. Using
variable selection techniques, for instance, may be necessary before
fitting the model to mitigate this issue. The probability of local
interaction is described by the following expression when all these
conditional variables are included:

[$$P(L_{i \rightarrow j} | A, t, C_{i,j}, \Omega)\qquad{(2)}$$]{#eq:local}

The representation of the local context in which probabilities are
estimated and the variables that should be taken into consideration
depend on the study system, the objectives of the study, and the
resources available to the researchers. In other words, these variables
do not systematically need to be accounted for. For example, in
@Gravel2019BriElt, for the purpose of model comparison, some models
incorporated environmental variables as conditional factors to estimate
interaction probabilities, while others did not. When accounted for,
these variables should be clearly described in the documentation of the
data (@Brimacombe2023ShoReu), preferentially in mathematical terms to
avoid any confusion in their interpretation and to limit manipulation
errors during their re-use. For instance, ecologists should be explicit
about their consideration of co-occurrence in their estimation of local
interaction probabilities. Indeed, it is important to specify if
probability values are conditional
$P(L_{i \rightarrow j} | C_{i,j} = 1)$ or not $P(L_{i \rightarrow j})$
on co-occurrence since this can significantly impact the interpretation
and analysis of the data. In tbl. 1, we present examples of studies that
used these diverse formulations of probabilistic interactions and
conditional variables.

::: {#tbl:prob}
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Expression                                           Type       Outcome                                  Reference
  ---------------------------------------------------- ---------- -------------------------- -----------------------
  $P(M_{i \rightarrow j})$                             regional   biological feasibility of         @Strydom2022Food
                                                                  the interaction            

  $P(L_{i \rightarrow j})$                             local      realization of the              @Fortuna2006HabLos
                                                                  interaction                           (null model)

  $P(L_{i \rightarrow j} \vert A)$                     local      realization of the         @Galiana2018Spatiala \*
                                                                  interaction in a given     
                                                                  area or volume             

  $P(L_{i \rightarrow j} \vert t)$                     local      realization of the            @Weinstein2017ComTra
                                                                  interaction during a given 
                                                                  time period                

  $P(L_{i \rightarrow j} \vert C_{i, j})$              local      realization of the               @Gravel2019BriElt
                                                                  interaction given that the 
                                                                  taxa co-occur              

  $P(L_{i \rightarrow j} \vert \Omega)$                local      realization of the               @Gravel2019BriElt
                                                                  interaction given                 (temperature and
                                                                  environmental conditions            precipitation)

  $P(L_{i \rightarrow j} \vert M_{i \rightarrow j})$   local      realization of the                      this study
                                                                  interaction given that the 
                                                                  taxa can biologically      
                                                                  interact                   
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

  : Table 1: **Mathematical expression of probabilistic interactions.**
  The probability of interaction between two taxa $i$ and $j$ is
  interpreted differently in a metaweb $M$ of potential interactions and
  a local web $L$ of realized interactions. Each expression includes a
  different conditional variable, when applicable. An example of a study
  employing each of these notations and conditional variables is
  provided, with the specific variables used indicated in parentheses.
  The study marked with an asterisk has been carried out on binary webs.
  Note that interaction probabilities can be contingent upon multiple
  conditional variables, or none at all. Additionally, local interaction
  probabilities might represent the probability of observing an
  interaction, not necessarily its actual occurrence.
:::

## Metawebs: regional catalogs of interactions

Metawebs are networks of potential interactions that have been designed
for broad spatial, temporal, and taxonomic scales (e.g., species food
webs at the continental scale). They represent the probability that taxa
can biologically interact regardless of their co-occurrence and local
environmental conditions. Regional interactions are by definition
context-independent, i.e. they are not measured at a specific location
and time. In contrast with probabilistic local webs, which represent the
stochasticity of interactions occurring in nature, probabilistic
metawebs measure our degree of belief in the capacity of two taxa to
interact (i.e., the probability that their traits could support an
interaction in the right conditions). Consequently, although *neutrally*
forbidden interactions (i.e., improbable interactions between rare
species, @Canard2012Emergencea) tend to have low probability values in
local webs, they may exhibit a higher probability in the metaweb.
Potential interactions describe the probability that there exists at
least one combination of phenotypes of taxa $i$ and $j$ that can
interact with each other if they were to encounter. To reduce any biases
in our calculation of this probability, it is crucial to ensure that the
set of traits sampled or considered accurately reflects the overall
trait distribution in both taxa. This enhances our confidence in
concluding that the taxa cannot interact when no positive observation
has been made and increases our capacity to detect an interaction when
it is biologically feasible. In addition to pairwise interactions, the
extent of sampling effort also contributes to shaping our assessment of
metaweb properties, as sampling a larger number of local webs allows us
to capture more regional interactions (@McLeod2021Sampling). A
probability of potential interaction in a metaweb $M$ can be expressed
as

[$$P(M_{i \rightarrow j}),\qquad{(3)}$$]{#eq:metaweb}

which, in contrast with local webs, is never conditional on any spatial,
temporal, co-occurrence or environmental variables (tbl. 1).

Starting from a selected set of taxa, which are usually distributed
within a broad region of interest, probabilistic metawebs can be built
using different data sources, including literature review, fieldwork,
and predictive models (e.g., the metaweb of trophic interactions between
Canadian mammals inferred by @Strydom2022Food). Every pair of taxa that
have confidently been observed to interact at least once can be given a
probability of $1$ (i.e., $P(M_{i \rightarrow j}) = 1$) since we know
that they *can* interact. This is not the case in local probabilistic
webs, in which interaction events usually remain stochastic (i.e.,
$P(L_{i \rightarrow j}) < 1$) after empirically observing interactions
because of their intrinsic spatiotemporal variability. Similarly,
although rare interactions typically have low probabilities in local
webs, they can have high probabilities in metawebs when the traits of
both taxa are congruent. On the other hand, interactions that were never
observed can have low probability values in both local and metawebs,
going as low as $0$ for forbidden links. However, because of observation
errors due to taxonomic misidentifications and ecological
misinterpretations (e.g., due to cryptic species and interactions,
@Pringle2020Resolving), many observations of interactions are in reality
false positives. Likewise, forbidden interactions can be false negatives
in metawebs, e.g. if they have been assessed for specific phenotypes,
locations or time. Employing Bayesian models, whether they are
mechanistic or phenomenological, could improve the accuracy of our
estimation of interaction probabilities within both local and regional
webs (e.g., @Bartomeus2016ComFra, @Cirtwill2019QuaFra). This improvement
is achieved in metawebs by leveraging prior information regarding the
feasibility of interactions along with the empirical data on observed
interactions.

# Properties of probabilistic webs

Probabilistic local and metawebs differ in their type of interactions
(i.e., realized or potential) and in the conditional variables upon
which interaction values depend. These differences are significant as
they influence the characteristics of probabilistic networks. Neglecting
to consider them may result in misleading results and interpretation
errors when analyzing the properties of probabilistic webs, which could
be particularly problematic when addressing crucial ecological questions
about networks. Here we compare the characteristics of local and
metawebs through the presentation of four common applications of
probabilistic interactions. All code and data to reproduce these
analyses are available at the Open Science Framework (TBD).

## Host-parasite network data

We use the collection of tripartite host-parasite networks sampled
across Europe, created by @Kopelke2017FooStra, in most of our case
studies. This dataset contains well-resolved binary local interactions
between willows (52 species), willow-galling sawflies (96 species), and
their parasitoids (126 species). Given its replicated webs spanning
large spatiotemporal scales, this dataset is well-suited for analyzing a
variety of ecological hypotheses and processes. Out of a total of 374
local webs, we retained those containing at least 5 species, resulting
in a set of 233 georeferenced local webs (networks sampled within areas
of 0.1 to 0.3 km² during June and/or July spanning 29 years). We built a
binary metaweb by aggregating all local interactions, which gave us a
regional web composed of 274 species and 1080 interactions. In the first
two panels of fig. 1, we show how the dissimilarity of interactions
between common species ($\beta_{OS}$) and the dissimilarity in species
composition ($\beta_{S}$) between the metaweb and aggregated local webs
(@Poisot2012Dissimilaritya) vary with the number of sampled local webs.
This shows that networks of local interactions are highly dissimilar
from the metaweb, both in terms of species and interactions, especially
when only a limited number of sites has been sampled. Both dissimilarity
indices were calculated based on the number of items shared by the two
webs ($c_{LM}$) and the number of items unique to the metaweb ($u_M$)
and to the aggregated local web ($u_L$). The $\beta_{S}$ dissimilarity
index uses species (nodes) as items being compared, while the
$\beta_{OS}$ index assesses dissimilarity based on interactions between
shared species (@Poisot2012Dissimilaritya). Both indices were calculated
following the $\beta_W$ index of @Whittaker1960Vegetation:

[$$\beta_W = \frac{c_{LM} + u_L + u_M}{(2 c_{LM} + u_L + u_M) / 2} - 1.\qquad{(4)}$$]{#eq:diss}

![Figure 1: **Network accumulation curves.** (a) Dissimilarity of
interactions between common species and (b) dissimilarity in species
composition between aggregated local webs and the binary metaweb of
host-parasite interactions. Aggregated local webs were obtained by
sequentially and randomly selecting a number of binary local webs and
aggregating both their species and interactions. In both panels, the
colored line represents the median dissimilarity across simulations and
the grey areas cover the 50% and 95% percentile intervals. (c) Scaling
of the number of links and (d) scaling of connectance with the number of
sampled binary and probabilistic local webs. For a better comparison
with binary webs, local probabilistic webs were derived from the
probabilistic metaweb with a false positive and false negative rate of
zero. A specific value of $P(L|M)$ (the local probability of interaction
among potentially interacting species) was used for all local webs
within a particular curve. Aggregated probabilistic local webs were
obtained by sequentially and randomly selecting a number of
probabilistic local webs and aggregating both their species and
interactions (with the value of $P(L|M)$ adjusting according to
eq. 6).](figures/network_accumulation.png){#fig:accumulation}

We converted these binary networks into probabilistic ones using models
based on simple assumptions. Our models are not designed to estimate the
exact values of probabilistic interactions. Instead, their purpose is to
create plausible networks that serve as illustrative examples to
highlight distinctions between probabilistic local and metawebs. We
created two probabilistic metawebs by employing constant false positive
and false negative rates for all regional interactions. In the first
metaweb, we set both false positive and false negative rates to zero to
prevent artificially inflating the total number of links, enabling a
more accurate comparison with binary webs. This gave us a probability of
regional interaction of 1 when at least one interaction has been
observed and of 0 in the absence of any observed interaction between a
given pair of species. In the second metaweb, we introduced a 5% false
positive rate to account for spurious interactions and a 10% false
negative rate to address the elevated occurrence of missing interactions
in ecological networks (@Catchen2023Missinga). We believe these rates
represent reasonable estimates of missing and spurious potential
interactions, but confirming their accuracy is challenging due to the
unavailability of data on the actual feasibility of interaction.
Observed interactions were thus given a probability of regional
interaction of 95%, whereas unobserved ones were assigned a probability
of 10%.

To build probabilistic local webs, we first recognize that local
interactions must initially be biologically feasible before occurring at
a specific time and space. A local probability of interaction
$P(L_{i \rightarrow j})$ can be expressed as the product of the
probability of local interaction given that the two taxa can potentially
interact $P(L_{i \rightarrow j} | M_{i \rightarrow j} = 1)$, which we
denote as $P(L|M)$ for the sake of simplicity, with their probability of
regional interaction $P(M_{i \rightarrow j})$:

[$$P(L_{i \rightarrow j}) = P(L_{i \rightarrow j} | M_{i \rightarrow j} = 1)
\times P(M_{i \rightarrow j} = 1).\qquad{(5)}$$]{#eq:local_meta}

We built the probabilistic local webs from the binary ones by using the
probabilistic metawebs and a constant value of $P(L|M)$ across
interactions. Low values of $P(L|M)$ indicate that feasible interactions
rarely occur locally, intermediate values around 50% suggest
considerable spatiotemporal variability, while high values indicate that
regional interactions are nearly always realized locally. Following
eq. 5, the local probability of interaction between a given pair of taxa
consistently remained equal to or below their probability of regional
interaction.

In the last two panels of fig. 1, we show how the aggregated number of
links and connectance (i.e., the proportion of all of the non-forbidden
links that are realized) scale with the number of sampled local
probabilistic webs, according to different values of $P(L|M)$. When
aggregating local probabilistic webs, the constancy of the probability
of regional interaction across the entire study area means that any rise
in the probability of local interaction is solely attributable to an
increase in $P(L|M)$. The probability $P(L_{1,2}|M)$ of local
interaction among potentially interacting species in an aggregated web
$L_{1,2}$ is obtained by:

[$$P(L_{1,2}|M) = 1 - (1 - P(L_{1}|M)) \times (1 - P(L_{2}|M)),\qquad{(6)}$$]{#eq:aggregate}

where $P(L_{1}|M)$ and $P(L_{2}|M)$ are the probabilities of local
interaction among two potentially interacting species in the subnetworks
$L_1$ and $L_2$, respectively. This equation provides the probability
that the interaction is realized in either (1) exclusively the local web
$L_1$, (2) exclusively the local web $L_2$ or (3) both local webs, given
that the two taxa have the biological capacity to interact.

By comparing the scaling relationships observed in binary and
probabilistic webs, fig. 1 illustrates that high values of $P(L|M)$ lead
to systematic overestimations in the number of links and connectance,
especially when $P(L|M) = 1$ (corresponding to the scenario where local
probabilities of interactions are equivalent to the probabilities of
regional interactions). However, these biases tend to diminish as the
number of sampled webs increases.

## Taxonomic scaling of interactions

Probabilistic webs offer a versatile approach to tackle a broad array of
ecological questions, depending on their level of organization. For
instance, the assemblage of interactions across ecological scales can be
explored through species-based networks, while clade-based networks
provide insights into macroevolutionary processes (e.g.,
@Gomez2010EcoInt). Given that our interpretation of the properties and
dynamics of ecological webs depends on their taxonomic scale
(@Guimaraes2020Structurea), investigating the phylogenetic scaling of
network structure emerges as a promising research avenue. Examining the
same system at various taxonomic scales can yield meaningful and
complementary ecological information, and, in our perspective, employing
probabilistic webs is an effective approach for such analyses.

There are no inherent differences in the taxonomic scaling between local
and metawebs, as only the nodes are defined taxonomically. In other
words, the probability values of edges in both local (eq. 2) and
metawebs (eq. 3) are not conditional on any taxonomic scale. The
phylogenetic scale is tied to the definition of the event itself (i.e.,
the interaction between two taxa), not to the conditional variables. In
both types of webs, transitioning to a broader level of organization
(e.g., from a species-level web $S$ to a genus-level web $G$) can be
accomplished directly by using probabilities from finer scales. For
example, in a network with $n_1$ species from genus $g_1$ and $n_2$
species from genus $g_2$, one can compute the probability that at least
one species from genus $g_1$ interacts with at least one species from
genus $g_2$ as follows:

[$$P(G_{g_1 \rightarrow g_2}) = 1 - \prod_{i = 1}^{n_1}\prod_{j = 1}^{n_2}(1 -
P(S_{g_{1i} \rightarrow g_{2j}})),\qquad{(7)}$$]{#eq:taxo}

where $g_{1i}$ and $g_{2j}$ are the species of the corresponding genus.
If it is known that at least two of these species interact (i.e.,
$P(S_{g_{1i} \rightarrow g_{2j}}) = 1$ for at least one pair of
$(g_{1i}, g_{2j})$), it implies a probability of genus interaction equal
to $1$. @Canard2012Emergencea built a species-based network following a
similar approach, by using simulated interactions between individuals
derived from a neutral model (i.e., a model that assumed ecological
equivalence among individuals). In contrast, a more sophisticated
approach is necessary when transitioning from a broader to a finer level
of organization. This is because knowledge of an interaction between two
genera does not guarantee that all possible pairwise combinations of
their species will also interact. One possible method is to build a
finer-scale network by generating probabilities of interactions through
random sampling from a beta distribution, parameterized by the
broader-scale network.

Ideally, our biological interpretation of probabilistic interactions
should remain consistent across a network even if it incorporates
heterogeneous levels of organization, such as a network whose nodes
represent both species and trophic species (groups of species sharing
similar predators and prey). This is common in ecological webs where
taxonomic resolution is typically low (@Hemprich-Bennett2021AssImp,
@VazquezSS2022Ecological). Interaction probabilities at broader
taxonomic scales should be based on probabilities of interactions
between individuals, for both local and metawebs. For instance, in local
individual-based food webs, the probability that two individuals
interact reflects our degree of belief that one individual will consume
the other. Similarly, in local species-based food webs, the probability
that two species interact represents our degree of belief that at least
one individual from the predator species consumes at least another
individual from the prey species. Furthermore, in local clade-based food
webs, the probability that two clades interact represents our degree of
belief that at least two species from these clades interact with each
other or, equivalently, that at least two individuals from these clades
interact with each other. Fundamentally, the taxonomic scaling of
interactions involves aggregating interactions between individuals into
larger groups, which may exhibit varying degrees of homogeneity based on
the organisms and the study system. In that regard, taxonomic scaling is
analogous to the spatial and temporal scaling of interactions, as they
all represent different ways to aggregate individuals into broader
groups (either spatially, temporally, or taxonomically).

## Spatial and temporal scaling of interactions

The investigation of network-area relationships and interaction
accumulation curves is an important area of research in network ecology.
First, network-area relationships elucidate the scaling of network
properties (such as modularity and trophic chain lengths) with spatial
scale (e.g., @Wood2015Effects, @Galiana2018Spatiala). The variations in
network structure across spatial scales may stem from the scaling of
species richness (species-area relationships, SARs) and the number of
interactions (@Brose2004UniSpa) with the sampled area. Additionally,
ecological processes unfolding at distinct spatial scales, such as the
spatial variability in local community composition resulting from
different sequences of extinction and colonization events, can also
contribute to this variation (@Galiana2018Spatiala). Next, interaction
accumulation curves describe the scaling of the number of observed
interactions with sampling effort (@Jordano2016Samplingb). Sampling
effort, which may correspond to the duration of the sampling period used
to construct the network, can impact connectance (@Bersier1999Scale) and
various measures of network structure (@Banasek-Richter2004Sampling,
@McLeod2021Sampling). Apart from sampling effort, the temporal scaling
of interactions also elucidates how network structure changes with the
temporal resolution of the network (@Poisot2012Dissimilaritya),
acknowledging that distinct interactions take place over time, ranging
from short-term fluctuations of interactions to long-term trends. As
probabilistic local webs may explicitly account for the spatiotemporal
variability of interactions, they offer a distinct approach to
investigating the scaling of network structure with space and time, in
contrast to binary and quantitative webs, by making the stochasticity of
interactions the focal point of the modeling process.

Local and metawebs exhibit distinct relationships with spatial and
temporal scales. On one hand, probabilistic metawebs, being independent
of any local context, feature regional interactions that do not scale
with space and time. This is because regional interactions depend solely
on the biological capacity of two taxa to interact, regardless of their
co-occurrence and specific environmental conditions. However,
probabilities of potential interactions may change (tending to become
more definitive) upon updating previous estimates with increased
sampling effort, even though they do not vary in a specific direction
with the spatial and temporal extent (boundaries) of the network. The
probability of two taxa potentially interacting should theoretically be
the same in all metawebs in which they are present, provided that the
data and methods used for estimation are consistent. For exemple, if a
smaller metaweb $M_1$ is derived from a larger metaweb $M_0$ by
selecting the subset of taxa present in the region described by $M_1$
and retaining all their interactions, their probabilities of interaction
should be identical regardless of scale, i.e.
$P(M_{1, i \rightarrow j}) = P(M_{0, i \rightarrow j})$. With a larger
or equal number of taxa in $M_0$ as compared to $M_1$, the total number
of interactions is expected to be higher or at least equal in the larger
web, even though pairwise probabilities remain identical.

On the other hand, local interactions scale both spatially and
temporally, given that they have more opportunities to be realized and
observed in larger areas and longer durations. This is attributed to
factors such as a higher number of individuals, greater trait
variations, and increased opportunities for encounters, as highlighted
by @McLeod2020EffSpe. For example, if a local probabilistic web $L_1$
with an area $A_1$ is derived from a larger web $L_0$ with an area
$A_0$, and $A_1$ is entirely nested within $A_0$, interaction
probabilities should be lower in the smaller web,
i.e. $P(L_{1,i \rightarrow j} | A_1 < A_0) \le P(L_{0,i \rightarrow j} | A_0)$.
However, if $A_1$ and $A_0$ are disjoint, interaction probabilities
could be higher in the smaller area, contingent upon their environmental
and biological conditions. Likewise, interaction probabilities are
expected to be lower in webs with shorter durations when time intervals
are nested. In fig. 2, we show how the expected number of local
host-parasite interactions scales with area, represented as an expanding
latitudinal window, in comparison with regional interactions. Even
though we employed local probabilities of interactions equal to regional
interactions for the purpose of comparison (i.e., using $P(L|M) = 1$
here), we notice that the total number of regional interactions scales
more rapidly than local interactions. This is because numerous regional
interactions involve species that never co-occur, and as a result, these
interactions are not captured in local webs.

![Figure 2: **Spatial scaling of interactions.** Expected number of
host-parasite interactions in a network aggregating all probabilistic
(a) local and (b) regional interactions within a latitudinal window of a
given length. Every dashed curve corresponds to a different expanding
window characterized by a different central latitude, with the colored
solid line representing the median number of interactions. Heatmaps of
the expected number of (c) local and (d) regional interactions found in
windows of specified length and central latitudes. Probabilities of
regional interactions were obtained with a false positive rate of 5% and
a false negative rate of 10%. Local probabilistic interactions were
derived from the probabilistic metaweb by setting the value of $P(L|M)$
(the local probability of interaction among potentially interacting
species) to $1$, ensuring a conservative comparison between aggregated
local webs and metawebs. Aggregated local webs were obtained by
aggregating both the species and interactions found within a particular
latitudinal window, with the values of $P(L|M)$ remaining at their
maximum value of $1$ following
eq. 6.](figures/spatial_scaling.png){#fig:spatial}

## Box 1: A spatiotemporally explicit model of interactions

Predicting local webs across time and space is a pivotal goal of network
ecology, especially given the scarcity of interaction data
(@Strydom2021Roadmapa). Ecologists may resort to predictive models
(e.g., generative Bayesian and machine learning models) to reconstruct
networks at fine spatial and temporal scales with limited interaction
data. For instance, real-time biomonitoring data coupled with
appropriate numerical models (@Bohan2017Nextgenerationa) can be employed
to reconstruct local ecological webs, opening avenues for in-depth
studies on local ecosystem functioning and dynamics. The probabilistic
representation of interactions acknowledges the inherent uncertainty in
these models, typically expressed through probability distributions. We
introduce and develop a simple generative mechanistic model for
probabilistic local interactions that takes into consideration their
spatiotemporal variability (i.e. a spatiotemporally explicit model of
local interactions). It is essential to note that our model is not
designed for regional interactions, which are scale-independent. Rather,
it could prove valuable for predicting local interactions across time
and space by generating new interaction data following parameter
inference.

As indicated by eq. 1, the probability that two taxa $i$ and $j$
interact at a specific location $(x, y, z)$ may be determined by the
product of their probability of interaction given co-occurrence and
their probability of co-occurrence. First, their co-occurrence
probability can be calculated using their individual occurrence
probabilities $P(X_i)$ and $P(X_j)$, along with the strength of
association $\gamma$ between their occurrences and co-occurrence
(@Cazelles2016Theorya):

[$$P(C_{i, j}) = P(X_i, X_j) = P(X_i) P(X_j) \gamma.\qquad{(8)}$$]{#eq:modelcoprob}

When $\gamma > 1$, it signifies a positive association in the geographic
distributions of both taxa, indicating that the presence of one taxon
enhances the probability of occurrence of the other. In empirical webs,
$\gamma > 1$ holds true for the majority of species pairs
(@Catchen2023Missinga). The co-occurrence of both taxa is modeled as the
outcome of a Bernoulli trial

[$$C_{i, j} \sim Bernoulli(P(X_i, X_j)).\qquad{(9)}$$]{#eq:modelco}

Next, the probability of interaction given co-occurrence can be made
temporally explicit by modeling it as a Poisson process with rate
parameter $\lambda$. This parameter represents the expected frequency of
interaction between the taxa within a defined time interval and can be
estimated using prior data on interaction strengths, when accessible.
The probability that two co-occurring taxa engage in an interaction
during a time period $t_0$ is given by:

[$$P(L_{i \rightarrow j} | C_{i, j} = 1) = 1-e^{-\lambda t_0},\qquad{(10)}$$]{#eq:modelrate}

which tends toward $1$ as $t_0 \to \infty$. It is important to note that
the units of $\lambda$ and $t_0$ are complementary. For instance, if the
duration $t_0$ is measured in months, $\lambda$ denote the expected
number of interactions per month.

The occurrence of an interaction between $i$ and $j$ can be modeled as a
Bernoulli trial with a probability of $P(L_{i \rightarrow j})$.
Consequently, a Bayesian inference model can be built based on the
preceding equations to estimate the value of the $\lambda$ and $\gamma$
parameters and generate novel interaction data:

[$$L_{i \rightarrow j} \sim \text{Bernoulli}(P(L_{i \rightarrow j}))\qquad{(11)}$$]{#eq:model}

[$$P(L_{i \rightarrow j}) = P(X_i) P(X_j) \gamma (1-e^{-\lambda t_0})\qquad{(12)}$$]{#eq:modeleq}

[$$\gamma \sim \text{Gamma}(2,0.5)\qquad{(13)}$$]{#eq:modelgamma}

[$$\lambda \sim \text{Exponential}(2)\qquad{(14)}$$]{#eq:modellambda}

In fig. 3, we show the variation in the probability of interaction under
different parameter values. In the right panel, we notice that,
irrespective of the interaction rate $\lambda$, the probability of
interaction converges toward an asymptote determined by the
co-occurrence $P(C_{i, j})$ (eq. 8). This model can be customized in
different ways, such as by linking $\lambda$ with specific environmental
variables or explicitly incorporating observation errors (i.e., the
probabilities of false negatives and false positives).

![Figure 3: **Parameters of the spatiotemporally explicit model of
interactions.** (a) Probability of local interaction given by the
process model (eq. 12) under different values of $\lambda$ and $\gamma$,
with $t_0 = 1$. The parameter values used in the right panel are denoted
by the white stars. (b) Scaling of the probability of interaction with
the duration parameter $t_0$ in eq. 12, for different values of
$\lambda$ and $\gamma$. In both panels, the individual probabilities of
occurrence $P_i(x, y, z)$ and $P_j(x, y, z)$ are set to a constant value
of $0.5$.](figures/spatiotemporal_model.png){#fig:spatiotemporal}

## Sampling for binary webs

The prediction of binary interactions through Bernoulli trials is an
important application of probabilistic webs. This approach proves
beneficial for analyzing the structural characteristics of probabilistic
webs, particularly in the absence of specific analytical measures. By
performing independent Bernoulli trials for each interaction in a
probabilistic web, a binary network may be generated. A probability
distribution of network properties can be obtained by measuring network
structure across multiple randomly generated networks
(@Poisot2016Structure). This method enables the representation of the
variability of network structure, albeit with possible biases when
connectance is low (@Poisot2014WheEco, @Chagnon2015ChaTop). Employing
this strategy to generate binary networks under a null model facilitates
null hypothesis significance testing, wherein the observed measure is
compared against the simulated distribution (e.g.,
@Bascompte2003NesAss). Additionally, the random generation of binary
networks, from a probabilistic web that accounts for the spatiotemporal
variability of interactions, may effectively capture network structure
across space and time. This facilitates the investigation of ecological
hypotheses about interactions at broad spatial and temporal scales.

There are at least two distinct approaches to sample binary networks
from probabilistic webs across space, for example, when attempting to
predict a binary network for each of a number of locations within a
given region. The first approach involves performing a singular
Bernoulli trial for each pair of taxa based on their regional
probability of interaction. In employing this approach, every pair of
taxa predicted to interact in the binary metaweb will be treated as
interacting in all local webs where they co-occur. This will result in
local pairwise interactions without spatial variation. The second
approach is to independently sample each of the local probabilistic
webs, which can be achieved by first generating distinct probabilistic
networks for each location. These local probabilistic webs may vary in
taxa composition and interaction probabilities. Subsequently, binary
networks can be independently sampled for each location, introducing
spatial variation in binary interactions.

In fig. 4, we compare the average connectance of binary networks
resulting from these two sampling techniques, where regional and local
interactions are drawn from our host-parasite probabilistic networks,
generating a number of binary web realizations for each site in the
dataset. These two sampling approaches yield different outcomes,
particularly for lower values of $P(L|M)$, which denote instances where
regional interactions do not consistently manifest locally. Small
discrepancies are also apparent between these techniques when we equate
the probability of local interaction to the probability of regional
interaction (i.e., when using $P(L|M) = 1.0$ in eq. 5), especially when
the number of binary network samples for each location is low. As
anticipated, we observe that sampling binary interactions from the
metaweb tends to overestimate connectance on average compared to
sampling them from local webs. Furthermore, we observe an increase in
the variability of connectance when employing a single sample,
representing what we consider as a more tangible process leading to the
realization of local and regional interactions in nature.

![Figure 4: **Connectance of sampled binary webs.** Comparison between
the average connectance of binary network samples obtained from the
probabilistic local and metawebs. Each dot corresponds to a different
site. The local probability of interaction between potentially
interacting species was set to three different values: (a)
$P(L|M) = 1.0$, (b) $P(L|M) = 0.75$, and (c) $P(L|M) = 0.50$. Grey dots
represent the outcome of a single trial, while colored dots represent
the average connectance of each network across $100$ trials. (d)
Reduction in the mean squared logarithmic error between the average
connectance of binary networks obtained from these two sampling methods
as the number of trials increases, for the same values of $P(L|M)$ used
in panels a-c. Probabilities of regional interactions were obtained with
a false positive rate of 5% and a false negative rate of 10%. Metaweb
samples were obtained by randomly sampling binary interactions from the
probabilistic metaweb, and then propagating this result to all local
webs that include the species potentially engaged in the interactions.
Local binary webs were generated by independently sampling binary
interactions for each local probabilistic
web.](figures/network_sampling.png){#fig:sampling}

The choice of a sampling approach can influence the selection of grid
cell size when delineating local communities within a broader region of
interest. In the first approach, pairwise interactions remain constant
irrespective of cell size since they are sampled only once from the
metaweb. However, in the second approach, local interaction
probabilities are contingent on the network area. For instance, consider
the local webs $L_1$ and $L_2$ with an area of $\frac{1}{2}A_0$, both
nested within $A_0$ but disjoint from each other, forming $L_0$. If we
treat $L_1$ and $L_2$ as independent, the probability of interaction
between taxa $i$ and $j$ in $L_0$ is given by:

[$$P(L_{0, i \rightarrow j}) = 1 - (1 - P(L_{1, i \rightarrow j}) \times P(L_{2,
i \rightarrow j})).\qquad{(15)}$$]{#eq:binary}

Due to its larger area, the probability that the two taxa interact in
$L_0$ is equal or greater than in $L_1$ and $L_2$. When sampling binary
interactions from local webs, it is crucial to sample at the same
spatial scale for which probabilities were estimated. Otherwise,
interaction probabilities must be adjusted to align with the intended
cell size, preventing systematic biases in predictions.

## Prediction of local webs from metawebs

Metawebs serve as a valuable source of ecological information for
predicting local webs across time and space. Binary local webs can be
reconstructed by selecting a subset of taxa and interactions from the
metaweb (@Dunne2006Network). This implies that metawebs consistently
contain more interactions than their corresponding local webs.
Determining the list of taxa to select can be achieved empirically or
through methods like range maps or species distribution models. As the
species composition of a community is arguably less difficult to sample
or predict than its interactions, the primary challenge lies in deciding
which interactions to select from the metaweb, a task that may
necessitate advanced statistical models and ecological expertise.
Inferring the structure of local webs from the metaweb before predicting
specific local pairwise interactions could hold promise
(@Strydom2021Roadmapa), considering that the structure of local webs is
constrained by the metaweb (@Saravia2022Ecological).

Building probabilistic local webs from a probabilistic metaweb involves
a reduction in the value of pairwise interaction probabilities. This
decrease is attributed to the prerequisite that two taxa must initially
possess the capacity to interact before engaging in local interactions
(eq. 5). Therefore, inferring local webs from their metaweb while
maintaining identical interaction probability values would introduce
systematic biases into the predictions. In such cases, these networks
would essentially represent smaller-scale metawebs of potential
interactions, possibly leading to misinterpretations by being perceived
as local interactions. As proposed by @McLeod2021Sampling, although
metawebs do not capture the spatiotemporal variability of interactions,
they establish an upper limit for local interactions. In other words,
the probability of two taxa interacting at a specific location and time
is consistently lower or equal to the probability of their regional
interaction:

[$$P(L_{i \rightarrow j} | A, t, C, \Omega) \le
P(M_{i \rightarrow j}).\qquad{(16)}$$]{#eq:switch}

Moreover, the probability that two taxa possess the biological capacity
to interact must exceed the probability of them interacting at any
location and time because they may never co-occur or encounter locally.
Specifically, the cumulative probability of local interactions across
all spatial, temporal, and environmental conditions must be less than
the probability of regional interaction, i.e.

[$$\int_\Omega\int_A\int_t P(L_{i \rightarrow j} | A, t, \Omega) dt dA d\Omega
\leq P(M_{i \rightarrow j}).\qquad{(17)}$$]{#eq:all}

Estimating more precisely the probability $P(L|M)$ that two taxa
interact locally if they can potentially interact allows for improved
predictions of local webs from a probabilistic metaweb. This task is
challenging due to the variability of this probability across space and
time, as well as its variability across pairwise interactions within a
network. Using simple models of $P(L|M)$, as demonstrated in our case
studies, represents an initial step toward the overarching objective of
reconstructing local webs from metawebs.

# Conclusion

In this contribution, we underline the importance of network metadata
for adequately interpreting and manipulating probabilistic interaction
data. The mathematical representation of probabilities and their
statistical properties depend on the type of interactions (local or
regional) and the conditions under which these interactions were
evaluated. We showed that probabilistic local and metawebs differ in
their relationship to spatial and temporal scales, with regional
interactions remaining consistent across scales. In contrast with
metawebs, local interactions are measured in a specific context (e.g.,
in a given area, time, and biological and environmental conditions) and
depend on taxa co-occurrence. These important conceptual differences
bring to light the need to use probabilistic data with caution, for
instance when generating binary network realizations across space and
predicting local webs from metawebs. Clear metadata describing the type
of interaction and the variables used in their estimation are required
to ensure adequate data manipulation. Better data practices and
foundations for probabilistic thinking in network ecology could enable
more reliable assessments of the spatiotemporal variability and
uncertainty of biotic interactions.

It is essential to enhance our comprehension of both regional and local
interactions, especially considering the current scarcity of interaction
data. However, while sampling biological communities does decrease the
uncertainty of interactions by accumulating evidence for their
feasibility and local realization, there is a limit to how much we can
diminish their inherent randomness. In metawebs, probabilities reflect
our limited knowledge of interactions (i.e., our degree of belief that
interactions are feasible), which is expected to improve with a larger
volume of data. We should anticipate that regional interactions will
become more definitive (with probabilities approaching $0$ or $1$) as we
investigate various conditions, including different combinations of
species traits. Conversely, in the case of local webs, which can be seen
as random instances of metawebs, randomness cannot be as reduced. In
local interactions, probabilities can be divided into a component
representing uncertainty and another representing spatiotemporal
variability. Owing to environmental heterogeneity, there will invariably
be instances in which an interaction occurs and others in which it does
not, across different times and locations, irrespective of the extent to
which we can improve our knowledge of its biological feasibility and the
local conditions that facilitate its occurrence. When local webs depict
probabilities of observing interactions rather than just their actual
occurrence, we must also consider the observation variability as an
additional source of randomness. Every ecological process is stochastic
but there is also a possibility that a phenomenon goes undetected.
Quantifying and partitioning this stochasticity will enable us to make
more accurate predictions about ecological interactions at various
spatial and temporal scales. This will prove to be of vital importance
as our time to understand nature runs out, especially at the places
where the impacts of climate change and habitat loss hit harder.

# Acknowledgment

We acknowledge that this study was conducted on land within the
traditional unceded territory of the Saint Lawrence Iroquoian,
Anishinabewaki, Mohawk, Huron-Wendat, and Omàmiwininiwak nations. This
work was supported by the Institute for Data Valorisation (IVADO) and
the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC)
Collaborative Research and Training Experience (CREATE) program, through
the Computational Biodiversity Science and Services (BIOS²) program. A
special thanks to all members of the Black Holes and Revelations working
group (organized by BIOS²) for their insightful discussions and valuable
feedback on this manuscript.

# References
