---
name: Supplementary Material
order: 1
---

# Host-parasite network data

## Data description 

We use the collection of tripartite host-parasite networks sampled across Europe
of @Kopelke2017FooStra. This dataset contains well-resolved binary local
interactions between willows ($52$ species), willow-galling sawflies ($96$
species), and their parasitoids ($126$ species). Out of a total of $374$ local
networks, we retained those containing at least $5$ species, resulting in a set
of $233$ georeferenced local networks (networks sampled within areas of $0.1$ to
$0.3$ kmÂ² during June and/or July spanning $29$ years). Given its replicated
networks spanning large spatiotemporal scales, this dataset is well-suited for
analyzing network variability.

We built a metaweb of binary interactions by aggregating all local interactions,
which gave us a regional network composed of $274$ species and $1080$
interactions. 

## Metawebs of probabilistic interactions

We converted these binary regional interactions into probabilistic ones using
simple assumptions. Our aim is not to estimate precise probability values, but
to create plausible metawebs of probabilistic interactions for our illustrative
examples. 

We created two metawebs of probabilistic interactions by employing constant
false positive and false negative rates for all regional interactions. In the
first metaweb, we set both false positive and false negative rates to zero to
prevent artificially inflating the total number of interactions, enabling a more
accurate comparison with binary interaction networks. This gave us a probability
of regional interaction of $1$ when at least one interaction has been observed
locally and of $0$ in the absence of any observed interaction between a given
pair of species. This metaweb was used in Box 2. 

In the second metaweb, we introduced a $5\%$ false positive rate to account for
spurious interactions and a $10\%$ false negative rate to address the elevated
occurrence of missing interactions in ecological networks
[@Catchen2023Missinga]. We believe these rates represent reasonable estimates of
missing and spurious potential interactions, but confirming their accuracy is
challenging due to the unavailability of data on the actual feasibility of
interactions. Observed interactions were thus given a probability of regional
interaction of $95\%$, whereas unobserved ones were assigned a probability of
$10\%$. This metaweb was used in Boxes 3 and 5.


## Local networks of probabilistic interactions

We built local networks of probabilistic interactions using the taxa found in
the empirical local networks and attributing pairwise interaction probabilities
based on the metawebs of probabilistic interactions $P(M_{i, j})$ and a constant
value of $P(L_{i, j, k}|M_{i, j})$ across interactions:

$$P(L_{i, j, k}) = P(L_{i, j, k} | M_{i, j})
\times P(M_{i, j}).$$ {#eq:local_meta_sup} 

We set all values of $P(L_{i, j, k}|M_{i, j})$ to $0.5$, $0.75$, or $1.0$
depending on the simulation. Intermediate values of $P(L_{i, j, k}|M_{i, j})$
around $50\%$ indicate considerable
spatiotemporal variability, while higher values close to $1.0$ indicate that
regional interactions are nearly always realized locally. 


# Methods for Box 2

## Methods for Figure 2 (a-b)

To measure the dissimilarity between the metaweb of binary interactions and
aggregated local networks, we randomly selected one local network of binary
interactions and sequentially sampled additional networks while aggregating both
their species and interactions. We repeated this sampling process one hundred
times and highlighted the median dissimilarity values across simulations, as
well as the $50\%$ and $95\%$ percentile intervals. 

We compared the metaweb and the aggregated local networks using the
dissimilarity in species composition $\beta_{S}$, and the dissimilarity of
interactions between common species $\beta_{OS}$ indices. Both dissimilarity
indices were calculated based on the number of items shared by the two networks
($c_{LM}$) and the number of items unique to the metaweb ($u_M$) and the
aggregated local network ($u_L$). The $\beta_{S}$ dissimilarity index uses
species (nodes) as items being compared, while the $\beta_{OS}$ index assesses
dissimilarity based on interactions between shared species. Both indices were
calculated following the $\beta_W$ index of @Whittaker1960Vegetation: 

$$\beta_W = \frac{c_{LM} + u_L + u_M}{(2 c_{LM} + u_L + u_M) / 2} - 1.$$

## Methods for Figure 2 (c-d)

We investigate how the number of local interactions and connectance scale with
the number of sampled (aggregated) local networks of probabilistic or binary
interactions. We built probabilistic local networks following
@Eq:local_meta_sup, and set $P(M_{i, j})$ to $1$ when the interaction was
observed at least once, and to $0$ otherwise (i.e., no false positive or false
negative in the metaweb). We used a constant value of $P(L_{i, j, k}|M_{i, j})$
for all non-aggregated interactions. 

When aggregating local networks of probabilistic interactions, the constancy of
the probability of regional interaction across the entire study area means that
any rise in the probability of local interaction is solely attributable to an
increase in $P(L_{i, j, k}|M_{i, j})$. For example, let $L_1$ and $L_2$ be two
local networks and $L_{1,2}$ the aggregated network. If $P(L_{i, j, 1}|M_{i,
j})$ and $P(L_{i, j, 2}|M_{i, j})$ are the probabilities that two potentially
interacting taxa interact respectively in $L_1$ and $L_2$, the probability
$P(L_{i, j, 1,2}|M_{i, j})$ that these taxa interact in the aggregated network
$L_{1,2}$ is obtained by: 

$$P(L_{i, j, 1, 2}|M_{i, j}) = 1 - [1 - P(L_{i, j, 1}|M_{i, j})] \times [1 -
P(L_{i, j, 2}|M_{i, j})],$$ {#eq:aggregate}

assuming independence between the interaction of the two taxa in different
networks. This equation represents the probability that the interaction is
realized in either (1) exclusively the local network $L_1$, (2) exclusively the
local network $L_2$ or (3) both, given that the two taxa have the biological
capacity to interact. 

Aggregated local networks were obtained by sequentially and randomly selecting a
number of local networks and aggregating both their species and interactions,
with the value of $P(L_{i, j, k}|M_{i, j})$ adjusting according to
@Eq:aggregate. 

# Methods for Box 3 

Probabilities of regional interactions were obtained with a false positive rate
of $5\%$ and a false negative rate of $10\%$. Local probabilistic interactions
were derived from probabilistic regional interactions by setting the value of
$P(L_{i, j, k}|M_{i,j})$ (the local probability of interaction among potentially
interacting species) to $1$, ensuring a conservative comparison between
aggregated local networks and metawebs. Aggregated local networks were obtained
by aggregating both the species and interactions found within a particular
latitudinal window, with the values of $P(L_{i, j, k}|M_{i, j})$ remaining at
their maximum value of $1$ following @Eq:aggregate.

\pagebreak

# References 
